<!DOCTYPE article PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DocBook V4.1//EN" [
  <!ENTITY m2-blurb SYSTEM "m2_blurb.docbook">
]>

<article>
    <articleinfo>
    <title>HOWTO: Programming S/MIME in Python with M2Crypto</title>

    <author>
      <firstname>Pheng Siong</firstname>
      <surname>Ng</surname>
      <affiliation>
        <address><email>ngps@netmemetic.com</email></address>
      </affiliation>
    </author>

    <copyright>
      <year>2000</year>
      <year>2001</year>
      <holder>Ng Pheng Siong.</holder>
    </copyright>

    <revhistory>
      <revision>
      <revnumber>$Revision: 1.1 $</revnumber>
      <date>$Date: 2003/06/22 16:41:18 $</date>
      </revision>
    </revhistory>
    </articleinfo>

    <sect1 id="introduction">
    <title>Introduction</title>
    &m2-blurb;

    <para>This document demonstrates programming S/MIME with M2Crypto.
    </para>
    </sect1>

    <sect1 id="smime"> 
    <title>S/MIME</title> 
    <para>S/MIME - Secure Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions
    <citation>RFC 2311, RFC 2312</citation> - provides a 
    consistent way to send and receive secure MIME data.  Based on the popular 
    Internet MIME standard, S/MIME provides the following cryptographic security 
    services for electronic messaging applications - 
    <emphasis>authentication</emphasis>, <emphasis>message integrity </emphasis> 
    and <emphasis>non-repudiation of origin </emphasis> (using <emphasis>digital 
    signatures</emphasis>), and <emphasis>privacy </emphasis> and <emphasis>data 
    security</emphasis> (using <emphasis>encryption</emphasis>).  
    </para> 
    </sect1>

    <sect1 id="keys-and-certificates">
    <title>Keys and Certificates</title>
    <para>To create an S/MIME-signed message, you need an RSA key pair
    (this consists of a public key and a private key) and an X.509
    certificate of said public key.
    </para>

    <para>To create an S/MIME-encrypted message, you need an X.509
    certificate for each recipient.
    </para>

    <para>To create an S/MIME-signed <emphasis>and</emphasis> -encrypted 
    message, first create a signed message, then encrypt the signed
    message with the recipients' certificates.
    </para>

    <para>You may generate key pairs and obtain certificates by using a
    commercial <emphasis>certification authority</emphasis> service.
    </para>

    <para>You can also do so using freely-available software. For many 
    purposes, e.g., automated S/MIME messaging by system administration 
    processes, this approach is cheap and effective.
    </para>

    <para>We now work through using OpenSSL to generate key pairs and
    certificates. This assumes you have OpenSSL installed properly on your
    system.
    </para>

    <para>First, we generate an X.509 certificate to be used for signing:
    </para>

    <screen>
    <userinput>
openssl req -newkey rsa:1024 -nodes -x509 -days 365 -out signer.pem
    </userinput>
    Using configuration from /usr/local/pkg/openssl/openssl.cnf
    Generating a 1024 bit RSA private key
    ..++++++
    ....................++++++
    writing new private key to 'privkey.pem'
    -----
    You are about to be asked to enter information that will be incorporated
    into your certificate request.
    What you are about to enter is what is called a Distinguished Name or a DN.
    There are quite a few fields but you can leave some blank
    For some fields there will be a default value,
    If you enter '.', the field will be left blank.
    -----
    Country Name (2 letter code) [AU]:<userinput><replaceable>SG</replaceable></userinput>
    State or Province Name (full name) [Some-State]:<userinput><replaceable>.</replaceable></userinput>
    Locality Name (eg, city) []:<userinput><replaceable>.</replaceable></userinput>
    Organization Name (eg, company) [Internet Widgits Pty Ltd]:<userinput><replaceable>M2Crypto</replaceable></userinput>
    Organizational Unit Name (eg, section) []:<userinput><replaceable>.</replaceable></userinput>
    Common Name (eg, YOUR name) []:<userinput><replaceable>S/MIME Sender</replaceable></userinput>
    Email Address []:<userinput><replaceable>sender@example.dom</replaceable></userinput>
    </screen>

    <para>This generates a 1024-bit RSA key pair, unencrypted, into
    <filename>privkey.pem</filename>; it also generates a self-signed X.509
    certificate for the public key into <filename>signer.pem</filename>. The
    certificate is valid for 365 days, i.e., a year.
    </para>

    <para>Let's rename <filename>privkey.pem</filename> so that we know it is
    a companion of <filename>signer.pem</filename>'s:
    </para>

    <screen>
    <userinput>mv privkey.pem signer_key.pem</userinput>
    </screen>

    <para>To verify the content of <filename>signer.pem</filename>, execute the
    following:
    </para>

    <screen>
    <userinput>
openssl x509 -noout -text -in signer.pem
    </userinput>
    Certificate:
        Data:
            Version: 3 (0x2)
            Serial Number: 0 (0x0)
            Signature Algorithm: md5WithRSAEncryption
            Issuer: C=SG, O=M2Crypto, CN=S/MIME Sender/Email=sender@example.dom
            Validity
                Not Before: Mar 24 12:56:16 2001 GMT
                Not After : Mar 24 12:56:16 2002 GMT
            Subject: C=SG, O=M2Crypto, CN=S/MIME Sender/Email=sender@example.dom
            Subject Public Key Info:
                Public Key Algorithm: rsaEncryption
                RSA Public Key: (1024 bit)
                    Modulus (1024 bit):
                        00:a9:d6:e2:b5:11:3b:ae:3c:e2:17:31:70:e1:6e:
                        01:f4:19:6d:bd:2a:42:36:2b:37:34:e2:83:1d:0d:
                        11:2e:b4:99:44:db:10:67:be:97:5f:5b:1a:26:33:
                        46:23:2f:95:04:7a:35:da:9d:f9:26:88:39:9e:17:
                        cd:3e:eb:a8:19:8d:a8:2a:f1:43:da:55:a9:2e:2c:
                        65:ed:04:71:42:ce:73:53:b8:ea:7e:c7:f0:23:c6:
                        63:c5:5e:68:96:64:a7:b4:2a:94:26:76:eb:79:ea:
                        e3:4e:aa:82:09:4f:44:87:4a:12:62:b5:d7:1f:ca:
                        f2:ce:d5:ba:7e:1f:48:fd:b9
                    Exponent: 65537 (0x10001)
            X509v3 extensions:
                X509v3 Subject Key Identifier: 
                    29:FB:38:B6:BF:E2:40:BB:FF:D5:71:D7:D5:C4:F0:83:1A:2B:C7:99
                X509v3 Authority Key Identifier: 
                    keyid:29:FB:38:B6:BF:E2:40:BB:FF:D5:71:D7:D5:C4:F0:83:1A:2B:C7:99
                    DirName:/C=SG/O=M2Crypto/CN=S/MIME Sender/Email=sender@example.dom
                    serial:00
    
                X509v3 Basic Constraints: 
                    CA:TRUE
        Signature Algorithm: md5WithRSAEncryption
            68:c8:6b:1b:fa:7c:9a:39:35:76:18:15:c9:fd:89:97:62:db:
            7a:b0:2d:13:dd:97:e8:1b:7a:9f:22:27:83:24:9d:2e:56:ec:
            97:89:3c:ef:16:55:80:5a:18:7c:22:d0:f6:bb:e3:a4:e8:59:
            30:ff:99:5a:93:3e:ea:bc:ee:7f:8d:d6:7d:37:8c:ac:3d:74:
            80:ce:7a:99:ba:27:b9:2a:a3:71:fa:a5:25:ba:47:17:df:07:
            56:96:36:fd:60:b9:6c:96:06:e8:e3:7b:9f:4b:6a:95:71:a8:
            34:fc:fc:b5:88:8b:c4:3f:1e:24:f6:52:47:b2:7d:44:67:d9:
            83:e8
    </screen>

    <para>Next, we generate a self-signed X.509 certificate for the
    recipient. Note that <filename>privkey.pem</filename> will be
    recreated.
    </para>

    <screen>
    <userinput>
openssl req -newkey rsa:1024 -nodes -x509 -days 365 -out recipient.pem
    </userinput>
    Using configuration from /usr/local/pkg/openssl/openssl.cnf
    Generating a 1024 bit RSA private key
    .....................................++++++
    .................++++++
    writing new private key to 'privkey.pem'
    -----
    You are about to be asked to enter information that will be incorporated
    into your certificate request.
    What you are about to enter is what is called a Distinguished Name or a DN.
    There are quite a few fields but you can leave some blank
    For some fields there will be a default value,
    If you enter '.', the field will be left blank.
    -----
    Country Name (2 letter code) [AU]:<userinput><replaceable>SG</replaceable></userinput>
    State or Province Name (full name) [Some-State]:<userinput><replaceable>.</replaceable></userinput>
    Locality Name (eg, city) []:<userinput><replaceable>.</replaceable></userinput>
    Organization Name (eg, company) [Internet Widgits Pty Ltd]:<userinput><replaceable>M2Crypto</replaceable></userinput>
    Organizational Unit Name (eg, section) []:<userinput><replaceable>.</replaceable></userinput>
    Common Name (eg, YOUR name) []:<userinput><replaceable>S/MIME Recipient</replaceable></userinput>
    Email Address []:<userinput><replaceable>recipient@example.dom</replaceable></userinput>
    </screen>

    <para>Again, rename <filename>privkey.pem</filename>:
    </para>

    <screen>
    <userinput>mv privkey.pem recipient_key.pem</userinput>
    </screen>

    <para>In the examples to follow, S/MIME Sender,
    <email>sender@example.dom</email>, shall be the sender of S/MIME messages,
    while S/MIME Recipient, <email>recipient@example.dom</email>, shall be the
    recipient of S/MIME messages.
    </para>

    <para>Armed with the key pairs and certificates, we are now ready to begin 
    programming S/MIME in Python. 
    </para>

    <note>
    <para>The private keys generated above are
    <emphasis>not passphrase-protected</emphasis>, i.e., they are
    <emphasis>in the clear</emphasis>. Anyone who has access to such a key can
    generate S/MIME-signed messages with it, and decrypt S/MIME messages
    encrypted to it's corresponding public key.
    </para>

    <para>We may passphrase-protect the keys, if we so choose. M2Crypto will 
    prompt the user for the passphrase when such a key is being loaded.
    </para>
    </note>

    </sect1>

    <sect1 id="m2crypto-smime">
    <title>M2Crypto.SMIME</title>
    <para>The Python programmer accesses M2Crypto's S/MIME functionality
    through class <classname>SMIME</classname> in the module
    <classname>M2Crypto.SMIME</classname>. Typically, an <classname>SMIME</classname> 
    object is instantiated; the object is then set up for the intended
    operation: sign, encrypt, decrypt or verify; finally, the operation is invoked on 
    the object.
    </para>

    <para><classname>M2Crypto.SMIME</classname> makes extensive use of
    <classname>M2Crypto.BIO</classname>: <classname>M2Crypto.BIO</classname>
    is a Python abstraction of the <classname>BIO</classname> abstraction in
    OpenSSL. A commonly used <classname>BIO</classname> abstraction in M2Crypto is
    <classname>M2Crypto.BIO.MemoryBuffer</classname>, which implements a
    memory-based file-like object, similar to Python's own 
    <classname>StringIO</classname>.
    </para>
    </sect1>

    <sect1 id="sign">
    <title>Sign</title>
    <para>The following code demonstrates how to generate an S/MIME-signed
    message. <filename>randpool.dat</filename> contains random data which is
    used to seed OpenSSL's pseudo-random number generator via M2Crypto.
    </para>

    <programlisting>
    from M2Crypto import BIO, Rand, SMIME

    def makebuf(text):
        return BIO.MemoryBuffer(text)

    # Make a MemoryBuffer of the message.
    buf = makebuf('a sign of our times')

    # Seed the PRNG.
    Rand.load_file('randpool.dat', -1)

    # Instantiate an SMIME object; set it up; sign the buffer.
    s = SMIME.SMIME()
    s.load_key('signer_key.pem', 'signer.pem')
    p7 = s.sign(buf)
    </programlisting>

    <para><varname>p7</varname> now contains a <emphasis>PKCS #7 signature
    blob</emphasis> wrapped in an <classname>M2Crypto.SMIME.PKCS7</classname>
    object. Note that <varname>buf</varname> has been consumed by
    <function>sign()</function> and has to be recreated if it is to be used
    again.
    </para>

    <para>We may now send the signed message via SMTP. In these examples, we
    shall not do so; instead, we'll render the S/MIME output in
    mail-friendly format, and pretend that our messages are sent and 
    received correctly.
    </para>

    <programlisting>
    # Recreate buf.
    buf = makebuf('a sign of our times')

    # Output p7 in mail-friendly format.
    out = BIO.MemoryBuffer()
    out.write('From: sender@example.dom\n')
    out.write('To: recipient@example.dom\n')
    out.write('Subject: M2Crypto S/MIME testing\n')
    s.write(out, p7, buf)

    print out.read()

    # Save the PRNG's state.
    Rand.save_file('randpool.dat')
    </programlisting>

    <para>Here's the output:
    </para>

    <screen>
    From: sender@example.dom
    To: recipient@example.dom
    Subject: M2Crypto S/MIME testing
    MIME-Version: 1.0
    Content-Type: multipart/signed ; protocol="application/x-pkcs7-signature" ; micalg=sha1 ; boundary="----3C93156FC7B4EBF49FE9C7DB7F503087"
    
    This is an S/MIME signed message
    
    ------3C93156FC7B4EBF49FE9C7DB7F503087
    a sign of our times
    ------3C93156FC7B4EBF49FE9C7DB7F503087
    Content-Type: application/x-pkcs7-signature; name="smime.p7s"
    Content-Transfer-Encoding: base64
    Content-Disposition: attachment; filename="smime.p7s"
    
    MIIE8AYJKoZIhvcNAQcCoIIE4TCCBN0CAQExCzAJBgUrDgMCGgUAMCIGCSqGSIb3
    DQEHAaAVBBNhIHNpZ24gb2Ygb3VyIHRpbWVzoIIC5zCCAuMwggJMoAMCAQICAQAw
    DQYJKoZIhvcNAQEEBQAwWzELMAkGA1UEBhMCU0cxETAPBgNVBAoTCE0yQ3J5cHRv
    MRYwFAYDVQQDEw1TL01JTUUgU2VuZGVyMSEwHwYJKoZIhvcNAQkBFhJzZW5kZXJA
    ZXhhbXBsZS5kb20wHhcNMDEwMzMxMTE0MDMzWhcNMDIwMzMxMTE0MDMzWjBbMQsw
    CQYDVQQGEwJTRzERMA8GA1UEChMITTJDcnlwdG8xFjAUBgNVBAMTDVMvTUlNRSBT
    ZW5kZXIxITAfBgkqhkiG9w0BCQEWEnNlbmRlckBleGFtcGxlLmRvbTCBnzANBgkq
    hkiG9w0BAQEFAAOBjQAwgYkCgYEA5c5Tj1CHTSOxa1q2q0FYiwMWYHptJpJcvtZm
    UwrgU5sHrA8OnCM0cDXEj0KPf3cfNjHffB8HWMzI4UEgNmFXQNsxoGZ+iqwxLlNj
    y9Mh7eFW/Bjq5hNXbouSlQ0rWBRkoxV64y+t6lQehb32WfYXQbKFxFJSXzSxOx3R
    8YhSPd0CAwEAAaOBtjCBszAdBgNVHQ4EFgQUXOyolL1t4jaBwZFRM7MS8nBLzUow
    gYMGA1UdIwR8MHqAFFzsqJS9beI2gcGRUTOzEvJwS81KoV+kXTBbMQswCQYDVQQG
    EwJTRzERMA8GA1UEChMITTJDcnlwdG8xFjAUBgNVBAMTDVMvTUlNRSBTZW5kZXIx
    ITAfBgkqhkiG9w0BCQEWEnNlbmRlckBleGFtcGxlLmRvbYIBADAMBgNVHRMEBTAD
    AQH/MA0GCSqGSIb3DQEBBAUAA4GBAHo3DrCHR86fSTVAvfiXdSswWqKtCEhUHRdC
    TLFGl4hDk2GyZxaFuqZwiURz/H7nMicymI2wkz8H/wyHFg8G3BIehURpj2v/ZWXY
    eovbgS7EZALVVkDj4hNl/IIHWd6Gtv1UODf7URbxtl3hQ9/eTWITrefT1heuPnar
    8czydsOLMYIBujCCAbYCAQEwYDBbMQswCQYDVQQGEwJTRzERMA8GA1UEChMITTJD
    cnlwdG8xFjAUBgNVBAMTDVMvTUlNRSBTZW5kZXIxITAfBgkqhkiG9w0BCQEWEnNl
    bmRlckBleGFtcGxlLmRvbQIBADAJBgUrDgMCGgUAoIGxMBgGCSqGSIb3DQEJAzEL
    BgkqhkiG9w0BBwEwHAYJKoZIhvcNAQkFMQ8XDTAxMDMzMTExNDUwMlowIwYJKoZI
    hvcNAQkEMRYEFOoeRUd8ExIYXfQq8BTFuKWrSP3iMFIGCSqGSIb3DQEJDzFFMEMw
    CgYIKoZIhvcNAwcwDgYIKoZIhvcNAwICAgCAMA0GCCqGSIb3DQMCAgFAMAcGBSsO
    AwIHMA0GCCqGSIb3DQMCAgEoMA0GCSqGSIb3DQEBAQUABIGAQpU8hFUtLCF6hO2t
    ec9EYJ/Imqqiiw+BxWxkUUVT81Vbjwdn9JST6+sztM5JRP2ZW+b4txEjZriYC8f3
    kv95YMTGbIsuWkJ93GrbvqoJ/CxO23r9WWRnZEm/1EZN9ZmlrYqzBTxnNRmP3Dhj
    cW8kzZwH+2/2zz2G7x1HxRWH95A=
    
    ------3C93156FC7B4EBF49FE9C7DB7F503087--
    </screen>
    </sect1>

    <sect1 id="verify">
    <title>Verify</title>
    <para>Assume the above output has been saved into <filename>sign.p7</filename>. 
    Let's now verify the signature:
    </para>

    <programlisting>
    from M2Crypto import SMIME, X509
    
    # Instantiate an SMIME object.
    s = SMIME.SMIME()
    
    # Load the signer's cert.
    x509 = X509.load_cert('signer.pem')
    sk = X509.X509_Stack()
    sk.push(x509)
    s.set_x509_stack(sk)
    
    # Load the signer's CA cert. In this case, because the signer's
    # cert is self-signed, it is the signer's cert itself.
    st = X509.X509_Store()
    st.load_info('signer.pem')
    s.set_x509_store(st)
    
    # Load the data, verify it.
    p7, data = SMIME.smime_load_pkcs7('sign.p7')
    v = s.verify(p7)
    print v
    print data
    print data.read()
    </programlisting>

    <para>Here's the output of the above program:
    </para>

    <screen>
    a sign of our times
    &lt;M2Crypto.BIO.BIO instance at 0x822012c&gt;
    a sign of our times
    </screen>

    <para>Suppose, instead of loading <filename>signer.pem</filename> above,
    we load <filename>recipient.pem</filename>. That is, we do a global
    substitution of <literal>recipient.pem</literal> for
    <literal>signer.pem</literal> in the above program. Here's the modified 
    program's output:
    </para>

    <screen>
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "./verify.py", line 22, in ?
        v = s.verify(p7)
      File "/usr/local/home/ngps/prog/m2/M2Crypto/SMIME.py", line 205, in verify
        raise SMIME_Error, Err.get_error()
    M2Crypto.SMIME.SMIME_Error: 312:error:21075075:PKCS7 routines:PKCS7_verify:certificate verify error:pk7_smime.c:213:Verify error:self signed certificate
    </screen>

    <para>As displayed, the error is generated by line 213 of OpenSSL's
    <filename>pk7_smime.c</filename> (as of OpenSSL 0.9.6); if you are a 
    C programmer, you may wish to look up the C source to explore OpenSSL's 
    S/MIME implementation and understand why the error message is worded thus.
    </para>
    </sect1>

    <sect1 id="encrypt">
    <title>Encrypt</title>
    <para>We now demonstrate how to generate an S/MIME-encrypted message:
    </para>

    <programlisting>
    from M2Crypto import BIO, Rand, SMIME, X509
    
    def makebuf(text):
        return BIO.MemoryBuffer(text)
    
    # Make a MemoryBuffer of the message.
    buf = makebuf('a sign of our times')
    
    # Seed the PRNG.
    Rand.load_file('randpool.dat', -1)

    # Instantiate an SMIME object.
    s = SMIME.SMIME()
    
    # Load target cert to encrypt to.
    x509 = X509.load_cert('recipient.pem')
    sk = X509.X509_Stack()
    sk.push(x509)
    s.set_x509_stack(sk)
    
    # Set cipher: 3-key triple-DES in CBC mode.
    s.set_cipher(SMIME.Cipher('des_ede3_cbc'))
    
    # Encrypt the buffer.
    p7 = s.encrypt(buf)
        
    # Output p7 in mail-friendly format.
    out = BIO.MemoryBuffer()
    out.write('From: sender@example.dom\n')
    out.write('To: recipient@example.dom\n')
    out.write('Subject: M2Crypto S/MIME testing\n')
    s.write(out, p7)
    
    print out.read()

    # Save the PRNG's state.
    Rand.save_file('randpool.dat')
    </programlisting>

    <para>Here's the output of the above program:
    </para>

    <screen>
    From: sender@example.dom
    To: recipient@example.dom
    Subject: M2Crypto S/MIME testing
    MIME-Version: 1.0
    Content-Disposition: attachment; filename="smime.p7m"
    Content-Type: application/x-pkcs7-mime; name="smime.p7m"
    Content-Transfer-Encoding: base64
    
    MIIBVwYJKoZIhvcNAQcDoIIBSDCCAUQCAQAxggEAMIH9AgEAMGYwYTELMAkGA1UE
    BhMCU0cxETAPBgNVBAoTCE0yQ3J5cHRvMRkwFwYDVQQDExBTL01JTUUgUmVjaXBp
    ZW50MSQwIgYJKoZIhvcNAQkBFhVyZWNpcGllbnRAZXhhbXBsZS5kb20CAQAwDQYJ
    KoZIhvcNAQEBBQAEgYCBaXZ+qjpBEZwdP7gjfzfAtQitESyMwo3i+LBOw6sSDir6
    FlNDPCnkrTvqDX3Rt6X6vBtTCYOm+qiN7ujPkOU61cN7h8dvHR8YW9+0IPY80/W0
    lZ/HihSRgwTNd7LnxUUcPx8YV1id0dlmP0Hz+Lg+mHf6rqaR//JcYhX9vW4XvjA7
    BgkqhkiG9w0BBwEwFAYIKoZIhvcNAwcECMN+qya6ADywgBgHr9Jkhwn5Gsdu7BwX
    nIQfYTYcdL9I5Sk=
    </screen>
    </sect1>

    <sect1 id="decrypt">
    <title>Decrypt</title>
    <para>Assume the above output has been saved into <filename>encrypt.p7</filename>. 
    Decrypt the message thusly:
    </para>

    <programlisting>
    from M2Crypto import BIO, SMIME, X509
    
    # Instantiate an SMIME object.
    s = SMIME.SMIME()
    
    # Load private key and cert.
    s.load_key('recipient_key.pem', 'recipient.pem')
    
    # Load the encrypted data.
    p7, data = SMIME.smime_load_pkcs7('encrypt.p7')
    
    # Decrypt p7.
    out = s.decrypt(p7)
        
    print out
    </programlisting>

    <para>Here's the output:
    </para>

    <screen>
    a sign of our times
    </screen>
    </sect1>

    <sect1 id="sign-and-encrypt">
    <title>Sign and Encrypt</title>
    <para>Here's how to generate an S/MIME-signed/encrypted message:
    </para>

    <programlisting>
    from M2Crypto import BIO, Rand, SMIME, X509
    
    def makebuf(text):
        return BIO.MemoryBuffer(text)
    
    # Make a MemoryBuffer of the message.
    buf = makebuf('a sign of our times')
    
    # Seed the PRNG.
    Rand.load_file('randpool.dat', -1)
    
    # Instantiate an SMIME object.
    s = SMIME.SMIME()
    
    # Load signer's key and cert. Sign the buffer.
    s.load_key('signer_key.pem', 'signer.pem')
    p7 = s.sign(buf)
    
    # Load target cert to encrypt the signed message to.
    x509 = X509.load_cert('recipient.pem')
    sk = X509.X509_Stack()
    sk.push(x509)
    s.set_x509_stack(sk)
    
    # Set cipher: 3-key triple-DES in CBC mode.
    s.set_cipher(SMIME.Cipher('des_ede3_cbc'))
    
    # Create a temporary buffer.
    tmp = BIO.MemoryBuffer()
    
    # Write the signed message into the temporary buffer.
    s.write(tmp, p7)
    
    # Encrypt the temporary buffer.
    p7 = s.encrypt(tmp)
        
    # Output p7 in mail-friendly format.
    out = BIO.MemoryBuffer()
    out.write('From: sender@example.dom\n')
    out.write('To: recipient@example.dom\n')
    out.write('Subject: M2Crypto S/MIME testing\n')
    s.write(out, p7)
    
    print out.read()
    
    # Save the PRNG's state.
    Rand.save_file('randpool.dat')
    </programlisting>

    <para>Here's the output of the above program:
    </para>

    <screen>
    From: sender@example.dom
    To: recipient@example.dom
    Subject: M2Crypto S/MIME testing
    MIME-Version: 1.0
    Content-Disposition: attachment; filename="smime.p7m"
    Content-Type: application/x-pkcs7-mime; name="smime.p7m"
    Content-Transfer-Encoding: base64
    
    MIIIwwYJKoZIhvcNAQcDoIIItDCCCLACAQAxggEAMIH9AgEAMGYwYTELMAkGA1UE
    BhMCU0cxETAPBgNVBAoTCE0yQ3J5cHRvMRkwFwYDVQQDExBTL01JTUUgUmVjaXBp
    ZW50MSQwIgYJKoZIhvcNAQkBFhVyZWNpcGllbnRAZXhhbXBsZS5kb20CAQAwDQYJ
    KoZIhvcNAQEBBQAEgYBlZlGupFphwhsGtIAPvDExN61qisz3oem88xoXkUW0SzoR
    B9zJFFAuQTWzdNJgrKKYikhWjDojaAc/PFl1K5dYxRgtZLB36ULJD/v/yWmxnjz8
    TvtK+Wbal2P/MH2pZ4LVERXa/snTElhCawUlwtiFz/JvY5CiF/dcwd+AwFQq4jCC
    B6UGCSqGSIb3DQEHATAUBggqhkiG9w0DBwQIRF525UfwszaAggeA85RmX6AXQMxb
    eBDz/LJeCgc3RqU1UwIsbKMquIs1S46Ebbm5nP75izPnujOkJ2hv+LNzqOWADmOl
    +CnGEq1qxTyduIgUDA2nBgCL/gVyVy+/XC9dtImUUTxtxLgYtB0ujkBNsOaENOlM
    fv4SGM3jkR+K/xlYG6HHzZGbfYyNGj2Y7yMZ1rL1m8SnRNmkCysKGTrudeNf6wT9
    J6wO9DzLTioz3ZnVr3LjsSKIb4tIp4ugqNJaLuW7m3FtZ3MAgxN68hBbJs8TZ8tL
    V/0jwUqS+grcgZEb9ymfcedxahtDUfHjRkpDpsxZzVVGkSBNcbQu92oByQVnRQ8m
    wrYLp3/eawM5AvuV7HNpTT5ZR+1t8luishHN9899IMP2Vyg0Ub67FqFypYmM2cm2
    sjAI4KpfvT00XFNvgLuYwYEKs9syGTO7hiHNQKcF44F5LYv6nTFwmFQB11dAtY9V
    ull4D2CLDx9OvyNyKwdEZB5dyV0r/uKIdkhST60V2Q9KegpzgFpoZtSKM/HPYSVH
    1Bc9f3Q/GqZCvNZZCMx8UvRjQR8dRWDSmPJ0VXG1+wJ+fCmSPP3AuQ1/VsgPRqx2
    56VrpGPpGut40hV8xQFbWIZ2whwWLKPFAHj8B79ZtFUzUrU6Z2rNpvv8inHc/+S/
    b6GR5s8/gucRblvd7n3OFNX5UJmPmcw9zWbu/1Dr9DY8l0nAQh21y5FGSS8B1wdE
    oD2M3Lp7JbwjQbRtnDhImqul2S4yu+m+wDD1aR2K4k3GAI7KKgOBWT0+BDClcn8A
    4Ju6/YUbj33YlMPJgnGijLnolFy0hNW7TmWqR+8tSI3wO5eNKg4qwBnarqc3vgCV
    quVxINAXyGQCO9lzdw6hudk8/+BlweGdqhONaIWbK5z1L/SfQo6LC9MTsj7FJydq
    bc+kEbfZS8aSq7uc9axW6Ti0eAPJ8EVHtwhSBgZQRweKFBXs6HbbhMIdc4N0M7Oq
    UiFXaF6s4n2uihVP6TqXtHEjTpZoC7pC+HCYiuKXUJtaqtXBOh+y3KLvHk09YL6D
    XmTDg+UTiFsh4jKKm/BhdelbR5JbpJcj5AId76Mfr8+F/1g9ePOvsWHpQr/oIQTo
    xEkaxCmzEgP0b6caMWfMUQrbVGxBBNcqKc/ir9fGGOPHATzzq/xLcQYvK1tZhd/D
    ah/gpMPndsyvVCEuFPluWyDiM0VkwHgC2/3pJIYFHaxK64IutmPsy393rHMEB4kN
    AHau6kWK+yL9qEVH1pP2zvswQ12P7gjt3T/G3bGsmvlXkEfztfjkXo6XnjcBNf5y
    G+974AKLcjnk1gzIgarz+lAMY57Gkw4oNDMrTqVQ2OJQlvOSbllPXzH+aAiavB8W
    ZPECLLwHxD4B1AuaiAArgKl935u/TOB+yQOR8JgGsUzROyJqHJ/SC51HkebgCkL1
    aggtjgPlIBEXLZAlhpWLZ9lAQyrQpvCVJYwaOvfMmvRav4NAFNoZ2/Q7S4Tn1z+U
    XX+f+GD58P4MPMhU5IKnz4yH4nlHnAiTEvcs85TZUAXze9g/uBOwZITeGtyLi52S
    aETIr4v7SgXMepX7ThQ1Pv/jddsK/u4j2F34u0XktwCP+UrbfkE2mocdXvdzxbmd
    tZSznK2qwgVSsPOs9MhUaepbnjmNBFFBrULhrUtSglM/VX/rWNiyh0aw4XYyHhIt
    9ZNlfEjKjJ67VEMBxBJ/ieUCouRGCxPYD1j65VT7oB3ZiyPu2F2nlUIcYNqPg1Sd
    QBCrdaOXdJ0uLwyTAUeVE+wMbgscLvWsfZcCCJHAvw9NHFMUcnrdWxAYMVETNUOn
    uryVAK7VfOldaz6z3NOSOi6nonNeHpR/sipBa4ik5xCRLT9e0S2QJgRvO9GyfAqz
    3DIzHtxIGePFzTiUYUTxS3i2gnMX2PEe3ChTLlYWD3jNeAKz0iOzpDphIF2xHLLQ
    1tCAqBmq/vUzALyDFFdFuTIqQZys4z/u4Dmyq9uXs421eN3v2hkVHvDy8uT2Ot29
    lg4Q5YezR1EjaW//9guL1BXbcKrTEdtxeNqtem7SpZOMTSwD2lhB8z65GrX90Cyt
    EMmaRSGYEdf5h1afL1SmKOMskbqxe1D2jG/vsXC7XX7xO/ioy0BdiJcYN1JiMOHJ
    EOzFol5I20YkiV6j+cenfQFwc/NkaSxEkR8AUHJSbvUmRQRl6r0nnsFpZdR1w7pv
    wkaT+eOpZynO4mY/ZtF6MpXJsixi6L4ZYXEbS6yHf+XGFfB0okILylmwv2bf6+Mq
    nqXlmGj3Jwq7X9/+2BDqvfpFFX5lSmItKZAobLdssjFR6roJxOqRsGia2aZ+0+U5
    VhgdITtnElgtHBaeZU5rHDswgdeLVBP+rGWnKxpJ+pLtNNi25sPYRcWFL6Erd25u
    eXiY8GEIr+u7rqBWpc9HR34sAPRs3ubbCUleT748keCbx247ImBtiDctZxcc1O86
    +0QjHP6HUT7FSo/FmT7a120S3Gd2jixGh06l/9ij5Z6mJa7Rm7TTbSjup/XISnOT
    MKWcbI1nfVOhCv3xDq2eLae+s0oVoc041ceRazqFM2TL/Z6UXRME
    </screen>
    </sect1>

    <sect1 id="decrypt-and-verify">
    <title>Decrypt and Verify</title>
    <para>Suppose the above output has been saved into
    <filename>se.p7</filename>. The following demonstrates how to decrypt and
    verify it:
    </para>

    <programlisting>
    from M2Crypto import BIO, SMIME, X509
    
    # Instantiate an SMIME object.
    s = SMIME.SMIME()
    
    # Load private key and cert.
    s.load_key('recipient_key.pem', 'recipient.pem')
    
    # Load the signed/encrypted data.
    p7, data = SMIME.smime_load_pkcs7('se.p7')
    
    # After the above step, 'data' == None.  
    # Decrypt p7. 'out' now contains a PKCS #7 signed blob.
    out = s.decrypt(p7)
    
    # Load the signer's cert.
    x509 = X509.load_cert('signer.pem')
    sk = X509.X509_Stack()
    sk.push(x509)
    s.set_x509_stack(sk)
    
    # Load the signer's CA cert. In this case, because the signer's
    # cert is self-signed, it is the signer's cert itself.
    st = X509.X509_Store()
    st.load_info('signer.pem')
    s.set_x509_store(st)
    
    # Recall 'out' contains a PKCS #7 blob.
    # Transform 'out'; verify the resulting PKCS #7 blob.
    p7_bio = BIO.MemoryBuffer(out)
    p7, data = SMIME.smime_load_pkcs7_bio(p7_bio)
    v = s.verify(p7)
    
    print v
    </programlisting>

    <para>The output is as follows:
    </para>

    <screen>
    a sign of our times
    </screen>
    </sect1>

    <sect1 id="smtp">
    <title>Sending S/MIME messages via SMTP</title>
    <para>In the above examples, we've assumed that our S/MIME messages 
    are sent and received automagically. The following is a Python function that 
    generates S/MIME-signed/encrypted messages and sends them via SMTP:
    </para>

    <programlisting>
    from M2Crypto import BIO, SMIME, X509
    import smtplib, string, sys
    
    def sendsmime(from_addr, to_addrs, subject, msg, from_key, from_cert=None, to_certs=None, smtpd='localhost'):
    
        msg_bio = BIO.MemoryBuffer(msg)
        sign = from_key
        encrypt = to_certs
    
        s = SMIME.SMIME()
        if sign:
            s.load_key(from_key, from_cert)
            p7 = s.sign(msg_bio, flags=SMIME.PKCS7_TEXT)
            msg_bio = BIO.MemoryBuffer(msg) # Recreate coz sign() has consumed it.
    
        if encrypt:
            sk = X509.X509_Stack()
            for x in to_certs:
                sk.push(X509.load_cert(x))
            s.set_x509_stack(sk)
            s.set_cipher(SMIME.Cipher('des_ede3_cbc'))
            tmp_bio = BIO.MemoryBuffer()
            if sign:
                s.write(tmp_bio, p7)
            else:
                tmp_bio.write(msg)
            p7 = s.encrypt(tmp_bio)
    
        out = BIO.MemoryBuffer()
        out.write('From: %s\r\n' % from_addr)
        out.write('To: %s\r\n' % string.join(to_addrs, ", "))
        out.write('Subject: %s\r\n' % subject) 
        if encrypt:
            s.write(out, p7)
        else:
            if sign:
                s.write(out, p7, msg_bio, SMIME.PKCS7_TEXT)
            else:
                out.write('\r\n')
                out.write(msg)
        out.close()
    
        smtp = smtplib.SMTP()
        smtp.connect(smtpd)
        smtp.sendmail(from_addr, to_addrs, out.read())
        smtp.quit()
    </programlisting>

    <para>This function sends plain, S/MIME-signed, S/MIME-encrypted,
    and S/MIME-signed/encrypted messages, depending on the parameters
    <parameter>from_key</parameter> and <parameter>to_certs</parameter>. The
    function's output interoperates with Netscape Messenger.
    </para>
    </sect1>

    <sect1 id="verifying-origin">
    <title>Verifying origin of S/MIME messages</title>
    <para>In our examples above that decrypt or verify messages, we skipped
    a step: verifying that the <literal>from</literal> address of the message 
    matches the <literal>email address</literal> attribute in the sender's 
    certificate.
    </para>

    <para>The premise of current X.509 certification practice is that the
    CA is supposed to verify your identity, and to issue a certificate with 
    <literal>email address</literal> that matches your actual mail address. 
    (Verisign's March 2001 failure in identity verification resulting in
    Microsoft certificates being issued to spoofers notwithstanding.)
    </para>

    <para>If you run your own CA, your certification practice is up to you, of
    course, and it would probably be part of your security policy.
    </para>

    <para>Whether your S/MIME messaging application needs to verify the 
    <literal>from</literal> addresses of S/MIME messages depends on your
    security policy and your system's threat model, as always.
    </para>
    </sect1>

    <sect1 id="netscape-messenger">
    <title>Interoperating with Netscape Messenger</title>
    <para>Suppose S/MIME Recipient uses Netscape Messenger. To enable Messenger 
    to handle S/MIME messages from S/MIME Sender, S/MIME Recipient needs 
    to configure Messenger with his private key and certificate, as well as S/MIME
    Sender's certificate.
    </para>

    <note> 
    <para>Configuring Messenger's POP or IMAP settings so that it retrieves
    mail correctly is beyond the scope of this HOWTO.  
    </para> 
    </note> 

    <para>The following steps demonstrate how to import S/MIME Recipient's
    private key and certificate for Messenger:
    </para>

    <procedure>
    <step>
    <para>Transform S/MIME Recipient's private key and certificate into
    <emphasis>PKCS #12</emphasis> format.
    </para>

    <screen>
    <userinput>
openssl pkcs12 -export -in recipient.pem -inkey recipient_key.pem -name "S/MIME Recipient" -out recipient.p12
    </userinput>
    Enter Export Password:<userinput><replaceable>&lt;enter&gt;</replaceable></userinput>
    Verifying password - Enter Export Password:<userinput><replaceable>&lt;enter&gt;</replaceable></userinput>
    </screen>
    </step>

    <step>
    <para>Start Messenger.
    </para>
    </step>

    <step>
    <para>Click on the (open) "lock" icon at the bottom left corner of
    Messenger's window. This brings up the "Security Info" dialog box.
    </para>
    </step>

    <step>
    <para>Click on "Yours" under "Certificates".
    </para>
    </step>

    <step>
    <para>Select "Import a certificate", then pick
    <filename>recipient.p12</filename> from the ensuing file selection dialog
    box.
    </para>
    </step>
    </procedure>

    <para>Next, you need to import <filename>signer.pem</filename> as a CA
    certificate, so that Messenger will mark messages signed by S/MIME Sender as
    "trusted":
    </para>

    <procedure>
    <step>
    <para>Create a DER encoding of <filename>signer.pem</filename>.
    </para>

    <screen>
    <userinput>
openssl x509 -inform pem -outform der -in signer.pem -out signer.der
    </userinput>
    </screen>
    </step>

    <step>

    <para>Install <filename>signer.der</filename> into Messenger as MIME type
    <literal>application/x-x509-ca-cert</literal>. You do this by downloading
    <filename>signer.der</filename> via Navigator from a HTTP or HTTPS server,
    with the correct MIME type mapping. (You may use 
    <filename>demo/ssl/https_srv.py</filename>, bundled with M2Crypto, for
    this purpose.) Follow the series of dialog boxes to accept
    <filename>signer.der</filename> as a CA for certifying email users.
    </para>
    </step>
    </procedure>

    <para>S/MIME Recipient is now able to decrypt and read S/MIME Sender's
    messages with Messenger. Messenger will indicate that S/MIME Sender's
    messages are signed, encrypted, or encrypted <emphasis>and</emphasis>
    signed, as the case may be, via the "stamp" icon on the message window's
    top right corner.
    </para>

    <para>Clicking on the "stamp" icon brings you to the Security Info dialog
    box. Messenger informs you that the message is, say, encrypted with
    168-bit DES-EDE3-CBC and that it is digitally signed by the private key
    corresponding to the public key contained in the certificate
    <filename>signer.pem</filename>.
    </para>
    </sect1>

    <sect1 id="microsoft-outlook">
    <title>Interoperating with Microsoft Outlook</title>
    <para>I do not know how to do this, as I do not use Outlook. (Nor do I use
    Netscape Messenger, actually. I use Mutt, top dog of MUAs. ;-) Information on 
    how to configure Outlook with keys and certificates so that it handles 
    S/MIME mail is gratefully accepted.
    </para>
    </sect1>

    <sect1 id="zsmime">
    <title>ZSmime</title>
    <para>ZSmime is a <ulink url="http://www.zope.org">Zope</ulink>
    <emphasis>product</emphasis> that enables Zope to generate 
    S/MIME-signed/encrypted messages. ZSmime demonstrates how to invoke 
    M2Crypto in a web application server extension.
    </para>

    <para>ZSmime has its own <ulink
    url="http://www.post1.com/home/ngps/zope/zsmime/howto.html">HOWTO</ulink>
    explaining its usage. (That HOWTO has some overlap in content with
    this document.)
    </para>
    </sect1>

    <sect1 id="resources">
    <title>Resources</title>
    <itemizedlist mark=opencircle>
    <listitem>
    <para>IETF S/MIME Working Group - 
    <ulink url="http://www.imc.org/ietf-smime">
    http://www.imc.org/ietf-smime</ulink>
    </para>
    </listitem>

    <listitem>
    <para>S/MIME and OpenPGP - 
    <ulink url="http://www.imc.org/smime-pgpmime.html">
    http://www.imc.org/smime-pgpmime.html</ulink>
    </para>
    </listitem>

    <listitem>
    <para>S/MIME Freeware Library - 
    <ulink url="http://www.getronicsgov.com/hot/sfl_home.htm">
    http://www.getronicsgov.com/hot/sfl_home.htm</ulink>
    </para>
    </listitem>

    <listitem>
    <para>Mozilla Network Security Services -
    <ulink url="http://www.mozilla.org/projects/security/pkg/nss">
    http://www.mozilla.org/projects/security/pkg/nss</ulink>
    </para>
    </listitem>

    <listitem>
    <para>S/MIME Cracking Screen Saver -
    <ulink url="http://www.counterpane.com/smime.html">
    http://www.counterpane.com/smime.html</ulink>
    </para>
    </listitem>
    </itemizedlist>
    </sect1>

    <sect1 id="id-kludge">
    <title></title>
    <para>
    <literal>$Id$</literal>
    </para>
    </sect1>
</article>
 
